doc/user/content/integrations/aws-msk.md, before:

---
title: "How to connect AWS MSK to Materialize"
description: "How to securely connect an AWS Managed Streaming for Kafka (MSK) cluster as a source to Materialize."
menu:
  main:
    parent: "integration-guides"
    name: "AWS MSK"
---

This guide goes through the required steps to connect Materialize to an AWS MSK cluster, including some of the more complicated bits around configuring security settings in MSK.

If you already have an MSK cluster, you can skip step 1 and directly move on to [Make the cluster public and enable SASL](#make-the-cluster-public-and-enable-sasl). You can also skip steps 3 and 4 if you already have Kafka installed and running, and have created a topic that you want to create a source for.

The process to connect Materialize to Amazon MSK consists of the following steps:
1. #### Create an Amazon MSK cluster
    If you already have an Amazon MSk cluster set up, then you can skip this step.

    a. Sign in to the AWS Management console and open the [Amazon MSK console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/msk/)

    b. Choose **Create cluster**

    c. Enter a cluster name, and leave all other settings unchanged

    d. From the table under **All cluster settings**, copy the values of the following settings and save them because you need them later in this tutorial: **VPC**, **Subnets**, **Security groups associated with VPC**

    e. Choose **Create cluster**

    **Note:** This creation can take about 15 minutes.

2. #### Make the cluster public and enable SASL
    ##### Turn on SASL
    a. Navigate to the [Amazon MSK console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/msk/)

    b. Choose the MSK cluster you just created in Step 1

    c. Click on the **Properties** tab

    d. In the **Security settings** section, choose **Edit**

    e. Check the checkbox next to **SASL/SCRAM authentication**

    f. Click **Save changes**

    You can find more details about updating an MSK cluster's security configurations [here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/msk/latest/developerguide/msk-update-security.html).

    ##### Create a symmetric key
    a. Now go to the [Amazon KMS (Key Management Service) console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/kms)

    b. Click **Create Key**

    c. Choose **Symmetric** and click **Next**

    d. Give the key and **Alias** and click **Next**

    e. Under Administrative permissions, check the checkbox next to the **AWSServiceRoleForKafka** and click **Next**

    f. Under Key usage permissions, again check the checkbox next to the **AWSServiceRoleForKafka** and click **Next**

    g. Click on **Create secret**

    h. Review the details and click **Finish**

    You can find more details about creating a symmetric key [here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/kms/latest/developerguide/create-keys.html#create-symmetric-cmk).

    ##### Store a new Secret
    a. Go to the [AWS Secrets Manager console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/secretsmanager/)

    b. Click **Store a new secret**

    c. Choose **Other type of secret** (e.g. API key) for the secret type

    d. Under **Key/value pairs** click on **Plaintext**

    e. Paste the following in the space below it and replace `<your-username>` and `<your-password>` with the username and password you want to set for the cluster
      ```
        {
          "username": "<your-username>",
          "password": "<your-password>"
        }
      ```

    f. On the next page, give a **Secret name** that starts with `AmazonMSK_`

    g. Under **Encryption Key**, select the symmetric key you just created in the previous sub-section from the dropdown

    h. Go forward to the next steps and finish creating the secret. Once created, record the ARN (Amazon Resource Name) value for your secret

    You can find more details about creating a secret using AWS Secrets Manager [here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/msk/latest/developerguide/msk-password.html).

    ##### Associate secret with MSK cluster
    a. Navigate back to the [Amazon MSK console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/msk/) and click on the cluster you created in Step 1

    b. Click on the **Properties** tab

    c. In the **Security settings** section, under **SASL/SCRAM authentication**, click on **Associate secrets**

    d. Paste the ARN you recorded in the previous subsection and click **Associate secrets**

    ##### Create the cluster's configuration
    a. Go to the [Amazon CloudShell console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/cloudshell/)

    b. Create a file (eg. _msk-config.txt_) with the following line
      ```
        allow.everyone.if.no.acl.found = false
      ```

    c. Run the following AWS CLI command, replacing `<config-file-path>` with the path to the file where you saved your configuration in the previous step
    ```
      aws kafka create-configuration --name "MakePublic" \
      --description "Set allow.everyone.if.no.acl.found = false" \
      --kafka-versions "2.6.2" \
      --server-properties fileb://<config-file-path>/msk-config.txt
    ```


    You can find more information about making your MSK cluster public [here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/msk/latest/developerguide/public-access.html).

3. #### Create a client machine
    If you already have a client machine set up that can interact with your MSK cluster, then you can skip this step.

    If not, you can create an EC2 client machine and then add the security group of the client to the inbound rules of the cluster's security group from the VPC console. You can find more details about how to do that [here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/msk/latest/developerguide/create-client-machine.html).

4. #### Install Kafka and create a topic
    To start using Materialize with Kafka, you need to create a Materialize source over a Kafka topic. If you already have Kafka installed and a topic created, you can skip this step.

    Otherwise, you can install Kafka on your client machine from the previous step and create a topic. You can find more information about how to do that [here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/msk/latest/developerguide/create-topic.html).


5. #### Create a source in Materialize
    a. Open the [Amazon MSK console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/msk/) and select your cluster

    b. Click on **View client information**

    c. Copy the url under **Private endpoint** and against **SASL/SCRAM**. This will be your `<broker-url>` going forward.

    d. From a `psql` terminal, connect to Materialize.

    e. Create a source using the command below. Replace `<source-name>` with whatever you want to name your source. The broker url is what you copied in step c of this subsection. The `<topic-name>` is the name of the topic you created in Step 4. The `<your-username>` and `<your-password>` is from _Store a new secret_ under Step 2.
    ```
      CREATE SECRET msk_password AS '<your-password>';

      CREATE CONNECTION kafka_connection
        FOR KAFKA
          BROKER '<broker-url>',
          SASL MECHANISMS = 'SCRAM-SHA-512',
          SASL USERNAME = '<your-username>',
          SASL PASSWORD = SECRET msk_password;

      CREATE SOURCE <source-name>
      FROM KAFKA CONNECTION kafka_connection TOPIC '<topic-name>'
      FORMAT text;
    ```

    f. If the command executes without an error and outputs _CREATE SOURCE_, it means that you have successfully connected Materialize to your MSK cluster.

    **Note:** The example above walked through creating a source which is a way of connecting Materialize to an external data source. We created a connection to MSK using SASL authentication, using credentials securely stored as secrets in Materialize's secret management system. For input formats, we used `text`, however, Materialize supports various other options as well. For example, you can ingest Kafka messages formatted in [JSON, Avro and Protobuf](/sql/create-source/kafka/#supported-formats). You can find more details about the various different supported formats and possible configurations [here](/sql/create-source/kafka/).

Commit message:

doc add ACLs step to MSK guide

doc/user/content/integrations/aws-msk.md, after:

---
title: "How to connect AWS MSK to Materialize"
description: "How to securely connect an AWS Managed Streaming for Kafka (MSK) cluster as a source to Materialize."
menu:
  main:
    parent: "integration-guides"
    name: "AWS MSK"
---

This guide goes through the required steps to connect Materialize to an AWS MSK cluster, including some of the more complicated bits around configuring security settings in MSK.

If you already have an MSK cluster, you can skip step 1 and directly move on to [Make the cluster public and enable SASL](#make-the-cluster-public-and-enable-sasl). You can also skip steps 3 and 4 if you already have Kafka installed and running, and have created a topic that you want to create a source for.

The process to connect Materialize to Amazon MSK consists of the following steps:
1. #### Create an Amazon MSK cluster
    If you already have an Amazon MSk cluster set up, then you can skip this step.

    a. Sign in to the AWS Management console and open the [Amazon MSK console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/msk/)

    b. Choose **Create cluster**

    c. Enter a cluster name, and leave all other settings unchanged

    d. From the table under **All cluster settings**, copy the values of the following settings and save them because you need them later in this tutorial: **VPC**, **Subnets**, **Security groups associated with VPC**

    e. Choose **Create cluster**

    **Note:** This creation can take about 15 minutes.

2. #### Make the cluster public and enable SASL
    ##### Turn on SASL
    a. Navigate to the [Amazon MSK console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/msk/)

    b. Choose the MSK cluster you just created in Step 1

    c. Click on the **Properties** tab

    d. In the **Security settings** section, choose **Edit**

    e. Check the checkbox next to **SASL/SCRAM authentication**

    f. Click **Save changes**

    You can find more details about updating an MSK cluster's security configurations [here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/msk/latest/developerguide/msk-update-security.html).

    ##### Create a symmetric key
    a. Now go to the [Amazon KMS (Key Management Service) console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/kms)

    b. Click **Create Key**

    c. Choose **Symmetric** and click **Next**

    d. Give the key and **Alias** and click **Next**

    e. Under Administrative permissions, check the checkbox next to the **AWSServiceRoleForKafka** and click **Next**

    f. Under Key usage permissions, again check the checkbox next to the **AWSServiceRoleForKafka** and click **Next**

    g. Click on **Create secret**

    h. Review the details and click **Finish**

    You can find more details about creating a symmetric key [here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/kms/latest/developerguide/create-keys.html#create-symmetric-cmk).

    ##### Store a new Secret
    a. Go to the [AWS Secrets Manager console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/secretsmanager/)

    b. Click **Store a new secret**

    c. Choose **Other type of secret** (e.g. API key) for the secret type

    d. Under **Key/value pairs** click on **Plaintext**

    e. Paste the following in the space below it and replace `<your-username>` and `<your-password>` with the username and password you want to set for the cluster
      ```
        {
          "username": "<your-username>",
          "password": "<your-password>"
        }
      ```

    f. On the next page, give a **Secret name** that starts with `AmazonMSK_`

    g. Under **Encryption Key**, select the symmetric key you just created in the previous sub-section from the dropdown

    h. Go forward to the next steps and finish creating the secret. Once created, record the ARN (Amazon Resource Name) value for your secret

    You can find more details about creating a secret using AWS Secrets Manager [here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/msk/latest/developerguide/msk-password.html).

    ##### Associate secret with MSK cluster
    a. Navigate back to the [Amazon MSK console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/msk/) and click on the cluster you created in Step 1

    b. Click on the **Properties** tab

    c. In the **Security settings** section, under **SASL/SCRAM authentication**, click on **Associate secrets**

    d. Paste the ARN you recorded in the previous subsection and click **Associate secrets**

    ##### Create the cluster's configuration
    a. Go to the [Amazon CloudShell console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/cloudshell/)

    b. Create a file (eg. _msk-config.txt_) with the following line
      ```
        allow.everyone.if.no.acl.found = false
      ```

    c. Run the following AWS CLI command, replacing `<config-file-path>` with the path to the file where you saved your configuration in the previous step
    ```
      aws kafka create-configuration --name "MakePublic" \
      --description "Set allow.everyone.if.no.acl.found = false" \
      --kafka-versions "2.6.2" \
      --server-properties fileb://<config-file-path>/msk-config.txt
    ```


    You can find more information about making your MSK cluster public [here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/msk/latest/developerguide/public-access.html).

3. #### Create a client machine
    If you already have a client machine set up that can interact with your MSK cluster, then you can skip this step.

    If not, you can create an EC2 client machine and then add the security group of the client to the inbound rules of the cluster's security group from the VPC console. You can find more details about how to do that [here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/msk/latest/developerguide/create-client-machine.html).

4. #### Install Kafka and create a topic
    To start using Materialize with Kafka, you need to create a Materialize source over a Kafka topic. If you already have Kafka installed and a topic created, you can skip this step.

    Otherwise, you can install Kafka on your client machine from the previous step and create a topic. You can find more information about how to do that [here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/msk/latest/developerguide/create-topic.html).

5. #### Create ACLs
    As we have `allow.everyone.if.no.acl.found` set to `false`, we need to create ACLs for the cluster and the topics that you've created in the previous step. Otherwise, if we don't create an associated ACL, then our user will not be able to interact with the cluster and read the messages from the topic.

    You can find more details about ACLs [here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/msk/latest/developerguide/msk-acls.html).

6. #### Create a source in Materialize
    a. Open the [Amazon MSK console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/msk/) and select your cluster

    b. Click on **View client information**

    c. Copy the url under **Private endpoint** and against **SASL/SCRAM**. This will be your `<broker-url>` going forward.

    d. From a `psql` terminal, connect to Materialize.

    e. Create a source using the command below. Replace `<source-name>` with whatever you want to name your source. The broker url is what you copied in step c of this subsection. The `<topic-name>` is the name of the topic you created in Step 4. The `<your-username>` and `<your-password>` is from _Store a new secret_ under Step 2.
    ```
      CREATE SECRET msk_password AS '<your-password>';

      CREATE CONNECTION kafka_connection
        FOR KAFKA
          BROKER '<broker-url>',
          SASL MECHANISMS = 'SCRAM-SHA-512',
          SASL USERNAME = '<your-username>',
          SASL PASSWORD = SECRET msk_password;

      CREATE SOURCE <source-name>
      FROM KAFKA CONNECTION kafka_connection TOPIC '<topic-name>'
      FORMAT text;
    ```

    f. If the command executes without an error and outputs _CREATE SOURCE_, it means that you have successfully connected Materialize to your MSK cluster.

    **Note:** The example above walked through creating a source which is a way of connecting Materialize to an external data source. We created a connection to MSK using SASL authentication, using credentials securely stored as secrets in Materialize's secret management system. For input formats, we used `text`, however, Materialize supports various other options as well. For example, you can ingest Kafka messages formatted in [JSON, Avro and Protobuf](/sql/create-source/kafka/#supported-formats). You can find more details about the various different supported formats and possible configurations [here](/sql/create-source/kafka/).
