- Feature name: (Insert name of feature)
- Associated issues: (Insert list of associated epics or issue)
- Associated PRs: (List associated PRs)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

One paragraph to explain the feature.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Why are we doing this? What use-cases does it enable? What is the desired outcome?

# Explanation
[explanation]: #explanation

Explain the design as if it were part of Materialize and you were teaching the team about it.
This can mean:

- Introduce new named concepts.
- Explain the feature using examples that demonstrate product-level changes.
- Explain how engineers and users should think about this change, and how it influences how everyone uses the product.
- If needed, talk though errors, backwards-compatibility, or migration strategies.
- Discuss how this affects maintainability, or whether it introduces concets that might be hard to change in the future.

# Reference explanation
[reference-explanation]: #reference-explanation

Focus on the implementation of the feature.
This is the technical part of the design.

- It is reasonably clear how the feature is implemented.
- What dependencies does the feature have and introduce?
- Focus on corner cases.
- How can we test the feature and protect against regressions?

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

Why should we *not* do this?

# Conclusion and alternatives
[conclusion-and-alternatives]: #conclusion-and-alternatives

- Why is the design the best to solve the problem?
- What other designs have been considered, and what were the reasons to not pick any other?
- What is the impact of not implementing this design?

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

- What questions need to be resolved to finalize the design?
- What questions will need to be resolved during the implementation of the design?
- What questions does this design rase that we should address separately?

# Future work
[future-work]: #future-work

Describe what work could follow from this design, which new aspects it enables, and how it might affect individual parts of Materialize.
Think in larger terms.
This section can also serve as a place to dump ideas that are related but not part of the design.

If you can't think of any, please note this down.
