# Schema documentation for Avro-formatted sinks

Associated issue: [#21557]

## Context

Avro schemas allow users to annotate records, record fields, and enums with
documentation. Note the `doc` fields in the following example Avro schema:

```json
{
  "type": "record",
  "name": "row",
  "doc": "represents a row in some materialized view",
  "fields" : [
    {"name": "c1", "type": "string", "doc": "this is the meaning of column c1"},
    {"name": "c2", "type": "int"}
  ]
}
```

When using an Avro-formatted sink, Materialize generates the Avro schema based
on the shape of the underlying relation. For example, given the following
sink:

```sql
CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW v AS SELECT 'text' AS c1, '3'::integer as c2;
CREATE SINK FROM v INTO KAFKA ... FORMAT AVRO USING CONFLUENT SCHEMA REGISTRY ...;
```

Materialize will automatically generate the following Avro schema and publish it
to the schema registry:

```json
{
  "type": "record",
  "name": "envelope",
  "fields" : [
    {"name": "c1", "type": "string"},
    {"name": "c2", "type": "int"}
  ]
}
```

Today, there is no way to instruct Materialize to include `doc` fields in the
generated Avro schema. This poses a challenge for organizations with
requirements on the use of documentation—e.g., a policy that requires that every
field in every schema published to the organization's schema registry has
documentation.

## Goals

Must haves:

  * Enable users with organizational policies on the use of `doc` fields in Avro
    schemas to use Avro-formatted sinks.

Nice to haves:

  * Consistency with Materialize's existing approach to generating Avro schemas
    from SQL relations.

  * Good ergonomics.

## Non-goals

None yet.

## Detailed description

### Design

#### SQL

We'll extend the `FORMAT AVRO` clause with a new `[KEY|VALUE] DOC ON
[TYPE|COLUMN]` option. For example:

```sql
CREATE SINK ...
FORMAT AVRO USING CONFLUENT SCHEMA REGISTRY ... (
    DOC ON COLUMN <column-specifier> = '<documentation string>',
    KEY DOC ON TYPE <type-specifier> = '<documentation string>',
    VALUE DOC ON COLUMN <column-specifier> = '<documentation string>',
    ...
)
WITH (...)
```

The option will be located in the existing parenthesized option list immediately
following the existing `FORMAT AVRO` clause. After this change,
`[KEY|VALUE] DOC ON [TYPE|COLUMN]` will live alongside the previously existing
`AVRO KEY FULLNAME` and `AVRO VALUE FULLNAME` options and we expect to add more
options to control the Avro schema in the future.

Aside: the current design of the `USING CONFLUENT SCHEMA REGISTRY` option is
historical and predates the introduction of the standardized option list. In the
future, we may also move the `USING CONFLUENT SCHEMA REGISTRY` into the option
list, where it can be freely intermixed with other options, e.g.:

```sql
FORMAT AVRO (
    DOC ON ...,
    CONFLUENT SCHEMA REGISTRY = '...',
    AVRO KEY FULLNAME = '...',
    KEY DOC ON ...,
)
```

Each `[KEY|VALUE] DOC ON ...` option describes a documentation comment that should
be attached to a single field or type in the Avro schema. A `KEY DOC ON ...`
option applies only to the key schema; a `VALUE DOC ON ...` option applies only
to the value schema; a `DOC ON ...` option applies to both types of schemas.

Each `DOC ON` option applies to either a column or a type:

  * Column comments (`[KEY|VALUE] DOC ON COLUMN ...`) name a column in the
    format `[[db.]schema.]object.column`. Object names are looked up according to usual
    SQL name resolution rules for the search path and active database.

  * Type comments (`[KEY|VALUE] DOC ON TYPE ...`) specify a type in the
    format `[[db.]schema.]object`. Object names are looked up according to usual
    SQL name resolution rules for the search path and active database.

Materialize will automatically use [comments] on the columns of the materialized
view and their constituent record types as the default documentation for the
fields and record types, respectively, in the Avro schema.

For a given field in the Avro schema, Materialize will consider the following
sources of documentation in order:

  * If the key schema, a `KEY DOC ON COLUMN` option specifically naming that
    field. If the value schema, a `VALUE DOC ON COLUMN` option specifically
    naming that field.
  * A `DOC ON COLUMN` option specifically naming that field.
  * A comment on the column that produced the field. If the field is at the top
    level, this will be a comment on a column of the sink's materialized view.
    If the field is nested, this will be a comment on a column of a constituent
    record type.

For a given record type in the Avro schema, Materialize will consider the
following sources of documentation in order:

  * If the key schema, a `KEY DOC ON TYPE` option specifically naming the type.
    If the value schema, a `VALUE DOC ON TYPE` option specifically naming the
    type.
  * A `DOC ON TYPE` option specifically naming the type.
  * A comment on the type.

For example, consider the following sink:

```sql
CREATE TYPE point AS (x integer, y integer);
CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW v AS SELECT ROW(1, 1)::point AS c1, 'text' AS c2;
CREATE SINK FROM v INTO KAFKA ... FORMAT AVRO ...;
```

Materialize will generate the following Avro value schema:

```json
{
  "type": "record",
  "name": "envelope",
  "doc": "documentation for materialized view underlying the sink, if any",
  "fields": [
    {
      "name": "c1",
      "doc": "documentation for field `envelope::c1``, if any",
      "type": {
        "type": "record",
        "name": "record0",
        "namespace": "com.materialize.sink",
        "doc": "documentation for type `com.materialize.sink.record0`, if any",
        "fields": [
          {
            "name": "x",
            "type": [
              "null",
              "int"
            ],
            "doc": "documentation for field `com.materialize.sink.record0::x`, if any"
          },
          {
            "name": "y",
            "type": [
              "null",
              "int"
            ],
            "doc": "documentation for field `com.materialize.sink.record0::y``, if any"
          }
        ]
      }
    },
    {
      "name": "c2",
      "doc": "documentation for field `envelope::c1``, if any",
      "type": "string"
    },
  ]
}
```

For the field `envelope::c1`, Materialize will consider the following sources of
documentation in order:

  * A `KEY DOC ON COLUMN` or `VALUE DOC ON COLUMN` option naming `v.c1`.
  * A `DOC ON COLUMN` option naming `v.c1`.
  * A comment on column `v.c1`.

The field `envelope::c2` is analogous.

For the type `com.materialize.sink.record0`, Materialize will consider the
following sources of documentation in order:

  * A `KEY DOC ON TYPE` or `VALUE DOC ON TYPE` option naming `point`.
  * A `DOC ON TYPE` option naming `point`.
  * A comment on type `point`.

For the field `com.materialize.sink.record0::x`, Materialize will consider the
following sources of documentation in order:

  * A `KEY DOC ON COLUMN` or `VALUE DOC ON COLUMN` option naming `point.x`.
  * A `DOC ON COLUMN` option naming `point.x`.
  * A comment on column `point.x`.

`com.materialize.sink.record0::y` is analogous.

Materialize will also use comments on the materialized view itself as the
default documentation for the top-level record (named `row` for the key schema
and `envelope` for the value schema). In the example above, Materialize will
consider the following sources of documentation in order:

  * A `DOC ON TYPE` comment naming `v`.
  * A comment on materialized view `v`.

Changes made to comments *after* the sink is created will not be reflected
in the Avro schema.

### User-facing documentation

The details in the [Design](#design) section above will need to be worked into
the Avro sink documentation. In particular, we should be sure to precisely
explain the order in which Materialize searches
for sources of documentation.

Note that we expect the `COMMENT` interface to be the most common method by
which users add comments to their sink schemas. The `DOC ON` option is primarily
useful for the implementation, so that a `CREATE SINK` command can be fully self
describing. We do expect users to use `DOC ON` in a pinch, e.g. if a single sink
needs to customize the documentation for a nested type, rather than pulling its
default description from its comment.

### Implementation

#### Parser

The extensions to the parser are straightforward.

#### Planner

The planner will "freeze" any comments that have been promoted to documentation
by rewriting the `CREATE SINK` statement to contain those comments as explicit
`DOC ON` options. This ensures that the Avro schema generated for a sink is
deterministic—i.e., that future changes to comments on the columns and types
used by the sink will *not* result in Materialize generating a different schema
on restart.

#### Catalog

No changes to the catalog are required. The documentation will be automatically
stored in the catalog via the addition of the `DOC ON` option, as the catalog
stores the raw DDL statement for each sink.

#### Avro schema generation

The `interchange::json::build_row_schema_json` will need to be adjusted to
take the requested documentation as a parameter. Loosely, it could grow a
`docs: BTreeMap<DocTarget, String>` parameter, where the key `DocTarget` is
defined like the following to represent key or type specifiers,
```
enum DocTarget {
    Type(GlobalId),
    Field { object_id: GlobalId, column_name: String }
}
```
and, the value represents the requested documentation for the specifier.

The sink code in the coordinator would need to convert the `DOC ON` comments
to this `BTreeMap`.

## Alternatives

### User-provided Avro schemas

Materialize could instead allow users to *provide* an Avro schema with all
required `doc` fields. For example, users could pre-publish the desired schema
to the schema registry, and then Materialize could load that schema at `CREATE
SINK` time.

There are several issues with this approach:

  * It is not ergonomic. The provided schema must exactly match the schema
    Materialize generates, *except* for the `doc` fields. Minor errors in
    constructing the schema (e.g., using a `long` where an `int` is required, or
    ordering fields wrong) will result in hard to debug failures.

  * It prevents Materialize from making backwards compatible changes to sink
    schemas.

    Today, we can make changes the generated Avro sink schemas as long as they
    are backwards compatible, according to Avro's schema resolution rules. For
    example, Materialize could choose to add a new field to the top-level record
    containing additional metadata. This is a backwards compatible change as
    long as Materialize can publish a new schema to the registry containing the
    new field. Downstream consumers using the old schema (as a reader schema)
    will simply discard the new field.

    We'd not be able to evolve schemas like this if users provide Materialized
    with the schema to use. The user-provided schema would not contain the new
    fields, and Materialize would not have the authority to edit that schema to
    contain the new fields.

At a high level, allowing users to specify their desired Avro schema would make
Materialize responsible for reconciling that Avro schema with the shape of the
materialized view provided to the sink. This reconciliation would be quite
delicate and difficult, and liable to cause sink breakage during version
upgrades.

So, as a philosophy, we propose that Materialize is always solely responsible
for generating the Avro schema used by an Avro-formatted sink. Customizations to
the generated Avro schema must be made via purpose-built options in the `FORMAT
AVRO` clause.

### Avro schema node specifiers

The `DOC ON` options, rather than specifying columns and types to which to
attach comments according to their SQL names, could instead specify fields in
the Avro schema by their Avro names. [Brennan](https://github.com/umanwizard) invented a way of
unambiguously naming Avro schema nodes in the `kgen` load generator; see the
next section for a description of its syntax and semantics.

This alternative was rejected because it too tightly couples the syntax of
`CREATE SINK` to the particulars of how we generate Avro schemas. For example,
we don't currently propagate SQL names for nested record types to the Avro
schema, and instead install an automatically generated name that the user
would need to guess. For example, consider again the example sink:

```sql
CREATE TYPE point AS (x integer, y integer);
CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW v AS SELECT ROW(1, 1)::point AS c1, 'text' AS c2;
CREATE SINK FROM v INTO KAFKA ... FORMAT AVRO ...;
```

Adding a comment to `point.x` would require an option like `DOC ON
'com.materialize.sink.record0::x' ...`, where the user hardcodes the
autogenerated `record0` name. This is not only painful for users, but painful
for us as well, as we'd be unable to change how we autogenerate record names
in the future without breaking user's `DOC ON` options.

Note also the user pain grows with the number of referenced types. With only one
nested record, it's easy to hardcode the `record0` rule. With dozens of
referenced types, it becomes all but impossible.

#### Details

An Avro schema node can appear in the following contexts:

  1. The top-level node of the schema,
  2. One of the fields of a record,
  3. One of the branches of a union,
  4. The value type of an array, or
  5. The value type of a map.

We define the "unambiguous name" of a schema node recursively as follows:

 * If the node is of a [named
   type](https://avro.apache.org/docs/1.10.2/spec.html#names) (record, enum, or
   fixed) then its unambiguous name is the same as its "fullname" as defined by
   the Avro spec; e.g. just its name if it is not part of a namespace, or its
   namespace, followed by `.`, followed by its name if it is.
 * Otherwise, if the node is the top-level node of the schema, its unambiguous
   name is the empty string (we will never have to deal with this, as sinks in
   Materialize can't have a schema that is just a timestamp field and nothing
   else. Things are always at least nested inside a record.)
 * Otherwise, if the node is a record field, its unambiguous name is the
   record's unambiguous name (i.e., its fullname), followed by `::`, followed by
   the field name. Note that you don't need to account for multiple levels of
   nesting here-- if record `my.namespace.a` contains record `my.namespace.b`
   which contains record `my.namespace.c` which contains field `f1`, you can
   just call that field `my.namespace.c::f1`, unambiguously.
 * Otherwise, if the node is one of the variants of a union, its unambiguous
   name is the union's unambiguous name, followed by a `.`, followed by the
   node's index within a union. I think we should actually change this and use
   the type name instead (e.g. `union_unambiguous_name.long` instead of
   `union_unambiguous_name.4`). That would work because unions are not allowed
   to contain multiple variants of the same kind of type unless they are named
   types.
 * Otherwise, if the node is the value type of an array or map, its unambiguous
   name is the array or map's unambiguous name, followed by `[]`.

## Future work

Possibly future work includes:

* Allowing changes to documentation comments for an existing sink.

  Hypothetical syntax:

  ```sql
  ALTER SINK ... FORMAT AVRO (
    ADD DOC ON <field-specifier> = '<documentation string>',
    ADD DOC ON <field-specifier> = '<documentation string>',
    ...
  );
  ```

* Refreshing the Avro schema with any changes made to comments since the sink
  was created.

  Hypothetical syntax:

  ```sql
  ALTER SINK ... FORMAT AVRO (REFRESH DOCS);
  ```

* Disabling the automatic use of Materialize comments as Avro documentation.

  Hypothetical syntax:

  ```sql
  CREATE SINK ... FORMAT AVRO ... (IGNORE COMMENTS);
  ```

* Supporting configurable sink policies that e.g. prevent creating sinks without
  documentation for every field.

  Hypothetical syntax:

  ```sql
  CREATE SINK POLICY ... FORMAT AVRO (REQUIRE DOCUMENTATION FOR ALL FIELDS);
  ```

## Open questions

None.

[#21557]: https://github.com/MaterializeInc/materialize/issues/21557
[comments]: https://github.com/MaterializeInc/materialize/issues/1212
