# Differential dataflow IR (DDIR)

- Associated: (Insert list of associated epics, issues, or PRs)

<!--
The goal of a design document is to thoroughly discover problems and
examine potential solutions before moving into the delivery phase of
a project. In order to be ready to share, a design document must address
the questions in each of the following sections. Any additional content
is at the discretion of the author.

Note: Feel free to add or remove sections as needed. However, most design
docs should at least keep the suggested sections.
-->

## Problem

We take SQL queries and translate them into maintained dataflows.
The translation is layered into various abstraction levels, from a direct SQL representation to something suitable for rendering as a dataflow.
As we're getting further away from SQL, less of its intricacies matter, and we're getting closer to what we can render as a dataflow.

Each abstraction level works on an intermediate representation (IR):
* _Plans_ (sic) are a direct representation of SQL.
* _Hir_ are decorrelated (?) plans, with some SQL-isms left.
* _Mir_ is where the bulk of optimization work happens.
  It is meant to be a representation of what we can do with Differential collections.
* _Lir_ (the compute plan) are rendering instructions.
  It is mostly the same as Mir, but with additional information applied, such as single time, input monotonicity.
  The boundary between Lir operators are collection bundles, which can be arranged or raw collections.

However, Lir fails to precisely capture what dataflows we could render.
The design outlines what the problems are, what we could gain from adding another IR, and how such an IR might look like.

Dataflows are a graph of operators with edges to move data.
Each operator takes typed inputs, and produces various typed outputs.
(Differential says that the data has a certain structure.)
Lir defines operators on a high level, and Lir operators are backed by multiple Timely or Differential operators.

From Lir's perspective, the edges all have the same type:
* An edge carries a stream of data.
* An edge provides multiple arranged forms.
* One of the above must be true, i.e., there can't be an edge with neither a stream not an arranged form.

What we can't do right now:
* Prune error streams: They're an intrinsic part of collections, and both the stream and arranged form can represent errors.
* Efficient temporal filters: Arrangements are not efficient at maintaining future updates as we need to rescan data on every tick.
  We implemented a data structure to make scanning more efficient, but only want to use it in places where we might observe future updates.
* Pruning unused streams and arrangements: We always provide a full collection bundle, containing potentially more information than needed by the consuming operator.
  Providing the information comes at a cost, which we'd like to avoid.

## Out of Scope

<!--
What does a solution to this problem not need to address in order to be
successful?

It's important to be clear about what parts of a problem we won't be solving
and why. This leads to crisper designs, and it aids in focusing the reviewer.
-->

## Solution Proposal

We introduce a new IR called Differential-dataflow IR (DDIR).
It represents a directed acyclic graph of operators, with different types of edges.
Each operator consumes some edges, and produces new ones.
It is a straight-forward translation of Lir.

A graph has nodes and edges:
```rust
struct Graph {
    nodes: Vec<Node>,
    edges: Vec<Edge>,
}
```
An edge can serve as input to multiple nodes.

Each node describes a transformation of inputs and produces new outputs:
```rust
struct Node {
    op: Op,
    inputs: Vec<Vec<EdgeId>>,
    outputs: Vec<EdgeId>,
}
```
An operator can have multiple logical inputs, and each input can have multiple edges.

Lir doesn't define operators with multiple semantically different outputs.
If needed, we could represent outputs as `Vec<Vec<EdgeId>>` where the inner vector groups the edges of a single output.

Edges are typed, with types corresponding to what Lir models:
```rust
enum Edge {
    Error,
    Collection,
    Arranged(Key),
}
```

Note that we might want additional edge variants, for example to represent keyed collections on `(Row, Row)` data.

Within a graph, each edge has a unique and opaque `EdgeId`:
```rust
struct EdgeId(usize);
```

Operators should be basic and not subdividable.
For example, the `Constant` operator in LIR produces two independent streams.
In DDIR, it would map to two operators, `ConstantRows` and `ConstantErr`, which produce a single typed output.

TODO: Operators can now have many inputs where they should only consider the union per logical input.

### Operators

We define the `Op` enum with the following variants:
```rust
enum Op {
    ConstantRows,
    ConstantErr,
    Let,
    LetRec,
    GetLocal,
    GetGlobal,
    // ... TODO
}
```

Note that the `LetRec` operator introduces multiple variables for cyclic dataflows.
Details TBD.

### Inputs and outputs

The graph has implicit inputs through operators that produce constants, or import external data.

In LIR, the output of a plan is the output of its root node.
In DDIR, we have a design choice to either take the outputs of the terminal node(s), or have an explicit `capture` operator.


## Mapping Lir operators

* `Constant` maps to an operator producing an errors and an operator producing data.
* `Get` imports an ID.
  The get makes all arranged forms and stream available for local imports, and the arranged form for global imports.
* `Let` binds an ID.
  It makes the outputs of the binding available within a body.
* ...

Note that we're still representing all possible edges, even if they're not used.

TODO: The union operator is odd in this IR.
Besides the `must_consolidate`, it should always just forward its inputs.
The `must_consolidate` could also be achieved by an arrange-by where we don't consume the arranged form.
(The consolidate operator directly forms a stream from the batches it would otherwise insert int an arrangement.)

## Pruning unneeded edges

We can traverse the graph and remove any edges that do not connect to outputs.
Similarly, this would help pruning error streams.

## Temporal filters

We introduce a `Temporal Bucketing` operator on edges that can have future updates and before arrangement-forming operators.
We can inspect MFPs to learn whether a certain edge can have future updates or not.

## Operator specialization

* An arrange-by that we only consume as a stream is just a consolidate operator.
  Not sure if this ever happens.

<!--
What is your preferred solution, and why have you chosen it over the
alternatives? Start this section with a brief, high-level summary.

This is your opportunity to clearly communicate your chosen design. For any
design document, the appropriate level of technical details depends both on
the target reviewers and the nature of the design that is being proposed.
A good rule of thumb is that you should strive for the minimum level of
detail that fully communicates the proposal to your reviewers. If you're
unsure, reach out to your manager for help.

Remember to document any dependencies that may need to break or change as a
result of this work.
-->

## Minimal Viable Prototype

<!--
Build and share the minimal viable version of your project to validate the
design, value, and user experience. Depending on the project, your prototype
might look like:

- A Figma wireframe, or fuller prototype
- SQL syntax that isn't actually attached to anything on the backend
- A hacky but working live demo of a solution running on your laptop or in a
  staging environment

The best prototypes will be validated by Materialize team members as well
as prospects and customers. If you want help getting your prototype in front
of external folks, reach out to the Product team in #product.

This step is crucial for de-risking the design as early as possible and a
prototype is required in most cases. In _some_ cases it can be beneficial to
get eyes on the initial proposal without a prototype. If you think that
there is a good reason for skipping or delaying the prototype, please
explicitly mention it in this section and provide details on why you'd
like to skip or delay it.
-->

## Alternatives

<!--
What other solutions were considered, and why weren't they chosen?

This is your chance to demonstrate that you've fully discovered the problem.
Alternative solutions can come from many places, like: you or your Materialize
team members, our customers, our prospects, academic research, prior art, or
competitive research. One of our company values is to "do the reading" and
to "write things down." This is your opportunity to demonstrate both!
-->

## Open questions

<!--
What is left unaddressed by this design document that needs to be
closed out?

When a design document is authored and shared, there might still be
open questions that need to be explored. Through the design document
process, you are responsible for getting answers to these open
questions. All open questions should be answered by the time a design
document is merged.
-->
