Materialize is licensed under the Business Source License agreement below.

Materialize occasionally includes source code that is derived from third-party
code. This situation is noted in the license header at the top of the affected
files. Full authorship information can be derived from the version control
history.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

MATERIALIZE BUSINESS SOURCE LICENSE AGREEMENT

Business Source License 1.1

Licensor:                  Materialize, Inc.

Licensed Work:             Materialize Version 20220722
                           The Licensed Work is © 2022 Materialize, Inc.

Additional Use Grant:      You may use one single server instance of the
                           Licensed Work for any purpose and you may
                           concurrently use multiple single server instances of
                           the Licensed Work in isolation, subject to each of
                           the following conditions: (a) you may not cluster any
                           server instances of the Licensed Work together for
                           one use; and (b) you may not use the Licensed Work
                           for a Database Service. A “Database Service” is a
                           commercial offering that allows third parties (other
                           than your employees and contractors) to access the
                           functionality of the Licensed Work by creating views
                           whose schemas are controlled by such third parties.

Change Date:               July 22, 2026

Change License:            Apache License, Version 2.0


For information about alternative licensing arrangements for the Software,
please visit https://materialize.com/cloud.

Notice

The Business Source License (this document, or the “License”) is not an Open
Source license. However, the Licensed Work will eventually be made available
under an Open Source License, as stated in this License.

License text copyright © 2017 MariaDB Corporation Ab, All Rights Reserved.
“Business Source License” is a trademark of MariaDB Corporation Ab.

Terms

The Licensor hereby grants You the right to copy, modify, create derivative
works, redistribute, and make non-production use of the Licensed Work. The
Licensor may make an Additional Use Grant, above, permitting limited production
use.

Effective on the Change Date, or the fourth anniversary of the first publicly
available distribution of a specific version of the Licensed Work under this
License, whichever comes first, the Licensor hereby grants you rights under the
terms of the Change License, and the rights granted in the paragraph above
terminate.

If your use of the Licensed Work does not comply with the requirements currently
in effect as described in this License, you must purchase a commercial license
from the Licensor, its affiliated entities, or authorized resellers, or you must
refrain from using the Licensed Work.

All copies of the original and modified Licensed Work, and derivative works of
the Licensed Work, are subject to this License. This License applies separately
for each version of the Licensed Work and the Change Date may vary for each
version of the Licensed Work released by Licensor.

You must conspicuously display this License on each original or modified copy of
the Licensed Work. If you receive the Licensed Work in original or modified form
from a third party, the terms and conditions set forth in this License apply to
your use of that work.

Any use of the Licensed Work in violation of this License will automatically
terminate your rights under this License for the current and all other versions
of the Licensed Work.

This License does not grant you any right in any trademark or logo of Licensor
or its affiliates (provided that you may use a trademark or logo of Licensor as
expressly required by this License).

TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW, THE LICENSED WORK IS PROVIDED ON AN
“AS IS” BASIS. LICENSOR HEREBY DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES AND CONDITIONS, EXPRESS
OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING (WITHOUT LIMITATION) WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, NON-INFRINGEMENT, AND TITLE.

MariaDB hereby grants you permission to use this License’s text to license your
works, and to refer to it using the trademark“Business Source License”, as long
as you comply with the Covenants of Licensor below.

Covenants of Licensor

In consideration of the right to use this License’s text and the “Business
Source License” name and trademark, Licensor covenants to MariaDB, and to all
other recipients of the licensed work to be provided by Licensor:

1. To specify as the Change License the GPL Version 2.0 or any later version, or
   a license that is compatible with GPL Version 2.0 or a later version, where
   “compatible” means that software provided under the Change License can be
   included in a program with software provided under GPL Version 2.0 or a later
   version. Licensor may specify additional Change Licenses without limitation.

2. To either: (a) specify an additional grant of rights to use that does not
   impose any additional restriction on the right granted in this License, as
   the Additional Use Grant; or (b) insert the text “None”.

3. To specify a Change Date.

4. Not to modify this License in any other way.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A copy of the MIT license is reproduced below. This license applies only to
files that indicate as such in their license header.

        Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any
        person obtaining a copy of this software and associated
        documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the
        Software without restriction, including without
        limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge,
        publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of
        the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software
        is furnished to do so, subject to the following
        conditions:

        The above copyright notice and this permission notice
        shall be included in all copies or substantial portions
        of the Software.

        THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF
        ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED
        TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A
        PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT
        SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
        CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION
        OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR
        IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER
        DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A copy of the Apache 2.0 license is reproduced below. This license applies only
to files that indicate as such in their license header.

                                   Apache License
                             Version 2.0, January 2004
                          http://www.apache.org/licenses/

     TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR USE, REPRODUCTION, AND DISTRIBUTION

     1. Definitions.

        "License" shall mean the terms and conditions for use, reproduction,
        and distribution as defined by Sections 1 through 9 of this document.

        "Licensor" shall mean the copyright owner or entity authorized by
        the copyright owner that is granting the License.

        "Legal Entity" shall mean the union of the acting entity and all
        other entities that control, are controlled by, or are under common
        control with that entity. For the purposes of this definition,
        "control" means (i) the power, direct or indirect, to cause the
        direction or management of such entity, whether by contract or
        otherwise, or (ii) ownership of fifty percent (50%) or more of the
        outstanding shares, or (iii) beneficial ownership of such entity.

        "You" (or "Your") shall mean an individual or Legal Entity
        exercising permissions granted by this License.

        "Source" form shall mean the preferred form for making modifications,
        including but not limited to software source code, documentation
        source, and configuration files.

        "Object" form shall mean any form resulting from mechanical
        transformation or translation of a Source form, including but
        not limited to compiled object code, generated documentation,
        and conversions to other media types.

        "Work" shall mean the work of authorship, whether in Source or
        Object form, made available under the License, as indicated by a
        copyright notice that is included in or attached to the work
        (an example is provided in the Appendix below).

        "Derivative Works" shall mean any work, whether in Source or Object
        form, that is based on (or derived from) the Work and for which the
        editorial revisions, annotations, elaborations, or other modifications
        represent, as a whole, an original work of authorship. For the purposes
        of this License, Derivative Works shall not include works that remain
        separable from, or merely link (or bind by name) to the interfaces of,
        the Work and Derivative Works thereof.

        "Contribution" shall mean any work of authorship, including
        the original version of the Work and any modifications or additions
        to that Work or Derivative Works thereof, that is intentionally
        submitted to Licensor for inclusion in the Work by the copyright owner
        or by an individual or Legal Entity authorized to submit on behalf of
        the copyright owner. For the purposes of this definition, "submitted"
        means any form of electronic, verbal, or written communication sent
        to the Licensor or its representatives, including but not limited to
        communication on electronic mailing lists, source code control systems,
        and issue tracking systems that are managed by, or on behalf of, the
        Licensor for the purpose of discussing and improving the Work, but
        excluding communication that is conspicuously marked or otherwise
        designated in writing by the copyright owner as "Not a Contribution."

        "Contributor" shall mean Licensor and any individual or Legal Entity
        on behalf of whom a Contribution has been received by Licensor and
        subsequently incorporated within the Work.

     2. Grant of Copyright License. Subject to the terms and conditions of
        this License, each Contributor hereby grants to You a perpetual,
        worldwide, non-exclusive, no-charge, royalty-free, irrevocable
        copyright license to reproduce, prepare Derivative Works of,
        publicly display, publicly perform, sublicense, and distribute the
        Work and such Derivative Works in Source or Object form.

     3. Grant of Patent License. Subject to the terms and conditions of
        this License, each Contributor hereby grants to You a perpetual,
        worldwide, non-exclusive, no-charge, royalty-free, irrevocable
        (except as stated in this section) patent license to make, have made,
        use, offer to sell, sell, import, and otherwise transfer the Work,
        where such license applies only to those patent claims licensable
        by such Contributor that are necessarily infringed by their
        Contribution(s) alone or by combination of their Contribution(s)
        with the Work to which such Contribution(s) was submitted. If You
        institute patent litigation against any entity (including a
        cross-claim or counterclaim in a lawsuit) alleging that the Work
        or a Contribution incorporated within the Work constitutes direct
        or contributory patent infringement, then any patent licenses
        granted to You under this License for that Work shall terminate
        as of the date such litigation is filed.

     4. Redistribution. You may reproduce and distribute copies of the
        Work or Derivative Works thereof in any medium, with or without
        modifications, and in Source or Object form, provided that You
        meet the following conditions:

        (a) You must give any other recipients of the Work or
            Derivative Works a copy of this License; and

        (b) You must cause any modified files to carry prominent notices
            stating that You changed the files; and

        (c) You must retain, in the Source form of any Derivative Works
            that You distribute, all copyright, patent, trademark, and
            attribution notices from the Source form of the Work,
            excluding those notices that do not pertain to any part of
            the Derivative Works; and

        (d) If the Work includes a "NOTICE" text file as part of its
            distribution, then any Derivative Works that You distribute must
            include a readable copy of the attribution notices contained
            within such NOTICE file, excluding those notices that do not
            pertain to any part of the Derivative Works, in at least one
            of the following places: within a NOTICE text file distributed
            as part of the Derivative Works; within the Source form or
            documentation, if provided along with the Derivative Works; or,
            within a display generated by the Derivative Works, if and
            wherever such third-party notices normally appear. The contents
            of the NOTICE file are for informational purposes only and
            do not modify the License. You may add Your own attribution
            notices within Derivative Works that You distribute, alongside
            or as an addendum to the NOTICE text from the Work, provided
            that such additional attribution notices cannot be construed
            as modifying the License.

        You may add Your own copyright statement to Your modifications and
        may provide additional or different license terms and conditions
        for use, reproduction, or distribution of Your modifications, or
        for any such Derivative Works as a whole, provided Your use,
        reproduction, and distribution of the Work otherwise complies with
        the conditions stated in this License.

     5. Submission of Contributions. Unless You explicitly state otherwise,
        any Contribution intentionally submitted for inclusion in the Work
        by You to the Licensor shall be under the terms and conditions of
        this License, without any additional terms or conditions.
        Notwithstanding the above, nothing herein shall supersede or modify
        the terms of any separate license agreement you may have executed
        with Licensor regarding such Contributions.

     6. Trademarks. This License does not grant permission to use the trade
        names, trademarks, service marks, or product names of the Licensor,
        except as required for reasonable and customary use in describing the
        origin of the Work and reproducing the content of the NOTICE file.

     7. Disclaimer of Warranty. Unless required by applicable law or
        agreed to in writing, Licensor provides the Work (and each
        Contributor provides its Contributions) on an "AS IS" BASIS,
        WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or
        implied, including, without limitation, any warranties or conditions
        of TITLE, NON-INFRINGEMENT, MERCHANTABILITY, or FITNESS FOR A
        PARTICULAR PURPOSE. You are solely responsible for determining the
        appropriateness of using or redistributing the Work and assume any
        risks associated with Your exercise of permissions under this License.

     8. Limitation of Liability. In no event and under no legal theory,
        whether in tort (including negligence), contract, or otherwise,
        unless required by applicable law (such as deliberate and grossly
        negligent acts) or agreed to in writing, shall any Contributor be
        liable to You for damages, including any direct, indirect, special,
        incidental, or consequential damages of any character arising as a
        result of this License or out of the use or inability to use the
        Work (including but not limited to damages for loss of goodwill,
        work stoppage, computer failure or malfunction, or any and all
        other commercial damages or losses), even if such Contributor
        has been advised of the possibility of such damages.

     9. Accepting Warranty or Additional Liability. While redistributing
        the Work or Derivative Works thereof, You may choose to offer,
        and charge a fee for, acceptance of support, warranty, indemnity,
        or other liability obligations and/or rights consistent with this
        License. However, in accepting such obligations, You may act only
        on Your own behalf and on Your sole responsibility, not on behalf
        of any other Contributor, and only if You agree to indemnify,
        defend, and hold each Contributor harmless for any liability
        incurred by, or claims asserted against, such Contributor by reason
        of your accepting any such warranty or additional liability.

     END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A copy of the PostgreSQL license is reproduced below. This license applies only
to files that indicate as such in their license header.

        Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its
        documentation for any purpose, without fee, and without a written
        agreement is hereby granted, provided that the above copyright notice
        and this paragraph and the following two paragraphs appear in all
        copies.

        IN NO EVENT SHALL THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA BE LIABLE TO ANY PARTY
        FOR DIRECT, INDIRECT, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES,
        INCLUDING LOST PROFITS, ARISING OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE AND ITS
        DOCUMENTATION, EVEN IF THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA HAS BEEN ADVISED OF
        THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

        THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA SPECIFICALLY DISCLAIMS ANY WARRANTIES,
        INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY
        AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. THE SOFTWARE PROVIDED HEREUNDER IS
        ON AN "AS IS" BASIS, AND THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA HAS NO OBLIGATIONS
        TO PROVIDE MAINTENANCE, SUPPORT, UPDATES, ENHANCEMENTS, OR
        MODIFICATIONS.

A copy of the 3-clause BSD license is reproduced below. This license applies
only to files that indicate as such in their license header.

    Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
    modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
    met:

       * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
       * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above
    copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer
    in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
    distribution.
       * Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its
    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
    this software without specific prior written permission.

    THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
    "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
    LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR
    A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
    OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
    SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
    LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
    DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
    THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
    (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
    OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
