---
title: "Materialize v0.28"
date: 2022-10-19
released: true
patch: 4
aliases: v0.28.0
---

## v0.28.0

* Use [static IPs](/ops/network-security/static-ips/) when initiating connections from sources
  and sinks. You can use these IPs in your firewall configuration to authorize
  connections from your Materialize region.

* Improve the syntax for [`CREATE CONNECTION`](/sql/create-connection). The
  `FROM` keyword was replaced with `TO`, and the option list must now be
  enclosed in parenthesis.

  **New syntax**

  ```mzsql
  CREATE CONNECTION kafka_connection TO KAFKA (
    BROKER 'unique-jellyfish-0000.us-east-1.aws.confluent.cloud.io:9092',
    SASL MECHANISMS = 'SCRAM-SHA-256',
    SASL USERNAME = 'foo',
    SASL PASSWORD = SECRET kafka_password
  );
  ```

  **Old syntax**

  ```mzsql
  CREATE CONNECTION kafka_connection FOR KAFKA
    BROKER 'unique-jellyfish-0000.us-east-1.aws.confluent.cloud:9092',
    SASL MECHANISMS = 'SCRAM-SHA-256',
    SASL USERNAME = 'foo',
    SASL PASSWORD = SECRET kafka_password;
  ```

  The old syntax is still supported for backwards compatibility, but its use is
  discouraged.

* Improve the usability of the `EXPLAIN` command. For an overview of the new
  `EXPLAIN` syntax, check the [updated documentation](/sql/explain-plan/).

* Include all indexes when running the [`SHOW INDEXES`](/sql/show-indexes)
  command, regardless of the number of columns. Previously, `SHOW INDEXES`
  would omit any indexes with 0 columns.

* Include all indexes when a schema is specified using `SHOW INDEXES ON`.
  Previously, the command would not correctly display existing indexes in
  non-active schemas.

* Add a default index for all `SHOW` commands in the
  [`mz_introspection`](/sql/show-clusters/#mz_catalog_server-system-cluster)
  cluster. For the best performance when executing `SHOW` commands, switch to
  the `mz_introspection` cluster using:

  ```mzsql
  SET CLUSTER = mz_introspection;
  ```

* Correctly use the `char` type for `pg_type.typcategory`. Previously,
  `typcategory` used the `text` type, which caused errors in language drivers
  that expect the documented `char` type, like sqlx.

* Add the [`mz_introspection` system
  cluster](/sql/show-clusters/#mz_catalog_server-system-cluster) to support
  efficiently serving common introspection queries.

* Add the [`mz_system` system
  cluster](/sql/show-clusters/#mz_system-system-cluster) to support various
  internal system tasks.

* **Breaking change.** Change the type of a materialized view in the
  `mz_objects` relation from `materialized view` to `materialized-view`, for
  consistency with how multi-word types are represented elsewhere in the
  catalog.
