---
title: "Materialize v0.45"
date: 2023-03-08
released: true
---

## v0.45.0

#### Sources and sinks

* Expose source progress metadata as a subsource that can be used to
  monitor **ingestion progress**. The name of the progress subsource can be
  specified using the `EXPOSE PROGRESS AS` clause in `CREATE SOURCE`;
  otherwise, it will be named `<src_name>_progress` by default.

  **Example**

  ```sql
  -- Given a "purchases" Kafka source, a "purchases_progress"
  -- subsource is automatically created
  SELECT partition, "offset"
  FROM (
	    SELECT upper(partition)::uint8 AS partition, "offset"
	    FROM purchases_progress
  )
  WHERE partition IS NOT NULL;

   partition |  offset
  -----------+----------
   0         | 13645902
   1         | 13659722
   2         | 13656787
  ```

  For Kafka sources, the progress subsource returns the next possible offset to
  consume from the identified partitions, and for PostgreSQL sources it returns
  the last Log Sequence Number (LSN) consumed from the upstream replication
  stream.

#### SQL

* Improve the behavior of the `search_path` session variable to match that of
  [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/ddl-schemas.html#DDL-SCHEMAS-PATH).
  You can now specify multiple schemas and Materialize will correctly resolve
  unqualified names by following the search path, as well as create objects in
  the first schema named (i.e. the _current schema_).

* Support `options` settings on connection startup. As an example, you can
now specify the cluster to connect to in the `psql` connection string:

  ```sql
  psql "postgres://user%40domain.com@host:6875/materialize?options=--cluster%3Dfoo"
  ```

* Add support for the `\du` meta-command, which lists all roles/users of the database.

* Add support for new SQL functions:

  | Function                                        | Description                                                             |
  | ----------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------- |
  | [`ceiling`](/sql/functions/#numbers-func)       | Works as an alias of the `ceil` function.                               |

<br>

* Remove the `CREATE USER` command, as well as the `LOGIN` and `SUPERUSER`
  attributes from the [`CREATE ROLE`](/sql/create-role/) command. This is part
  of the work to enable **Role-based access control** (RBAC) in a future release
  {{% gh 11579 %}}.

#### Bug fixes and other improvements

* Improve the error message for naming collisions, specifying the catalog item
  type.

  **Example**

  ```sql
  CREATE VIEW foo AS SELECT 'bar';

  ERROR:  view "materialize.public.foo" already exists
  ```

* Fix a bug that would sporadically prevent clusters from coming online {{% gh 17774 %}}.

* Improve `SUBSCRIBE` error handling. Prior to this release, subscriptions
  ignored errors in their input, which could lead to correctness issues.

* Return an error rather than crashing if source data contains invalid
  retractions, which might happen in the presence of e.g. incomplete or invalid
  data {{% gh 17709 %}}.

* Fix a bug that could cause Materialize to crash when expressions in `CREATE
  TABLE ... DEFAULT` clauses or `INSERT ... RETURNING` clauses contained nested
  parentheses {{% gh 17723 %}}.

* Avoid panicking when attempting to parse a range from strings containing
  multibyte characters {{% gh 17803 %}}.
