---
title: "Materialize v0.54"
date: 2023-05-17
released: true
---

## v0.54.0

#### SQL

* Add [`mz_internal.mz_cluster_replica_history`](/sql/system-catalog/mz_internal/#mz_cluster_replica_history)
  to the system catalog. This view contains information about the timespan of
  each replica, including the times at which it was created and dropped (if
  applicable).

* Add `envelope_state_bytes` and `envelope_state_count` to the
  [`mz_internal.mz_source_statistics`](/sql/system-catalog/mz_internal/#mz_source_statistics)
  system catalog table. These columns provide an approximation of the state
  size maintained for upsert sources (i.e. sources using `ENVELOPE
  UPSERT` or `ENVELOPE DEBEZIUM`). In the future, this will allow users to
  relate upsert state size to disk utilization.

* Improve and extend the base implementation of **Role-based
  access control** (RBAC):

  * Consider privileges on database objects when executing statements. If RBAC
    is enabled, Materialize will check the privileges for a role before
    executing any statements.

  * Improve the `GRANT` and `REVOKE` privilege commands to support multiple
    roles, as well as the `ALL` keyword to indicate that all privileges should
    be granted or revoked.

    ```sql
    GRANT SELECT ON mv TO joe, mike;

    GRANT ALL ON CLUSTER dev TO joe;
    ```

  * Add support for the [`DROP OWNED`](/sql/drop-owned/) command, which drops
    all the objects that are owned by one of the specified roles from a
    Materialize region. Any privileges granted to the given roles on objects
    will also be revoked.

  It's important to note that role-based access control (RBAC) is **disabled by
  default**. You must [contact us](https://materialize.com/contact/) to enable
  this feature in your Materialize region.
