---
title: "Materialize v0.77"
date: 2023-11-15
released: true
patch: 1
---

## v0.77.0

#### Sources and sinks

* Support the `now()` function in the `CHECK` expression of [webhook sources](/sql/create-source/webhook/).
  This allows rejecting requests when a timestamp included in the headers is too
  far behind Materialize's clock, which is often recommended by webhook providers to
  help revent replay attacks.

  **Example**

  ```mzsql
  CREATE SOURCE webhook_with_time_based_rejection
  IN CLUSTER webhook_cluster
  FROM WEBHOOK
	  BODY FORMAT TEXT
	  CHECK (
	    WITH (HEADERS)
	    (headers->'timestamp'::text)::timestamp + INTERVAL '30s' >= now()
	  );
  ```

#### SQL

* Support using timezone abbreviations in contexts where timezone input is accepted.

  **Example**

  ```mzsql
  SELECT timezone_offset('America/New_York', '2023-11-05T06:00:00+00')
  ----
  (EST,-05:00:00,00:00:00)
  ```

* Add [`mz_internal.mz_materialization_lag`](/sql/system-catalog/mz_internal/#mz_materialization_lag)
  to the system catalog. This view describes the difference between the input
  frontiers and the output frontier for each materialized view, index, and sink
  in the system. For hydrated dataflows, this lag roughly corresponds to the time
  it takes for updates at the inputs to be reflected in the output.

#### Bug fixes and other improvements

* **Breaking change.** Fix timezone offset parsing {{% gh 22896 %}} and remove
    support for the `time` type {{% gh 22960 %}} in the `timezone` function
    and the `AT TIME ZONE` operator. These changes follow the PostgreSQL
    specification.

* Extend `pg_catalog` system catalog coverage to include the
  [`pg_timezone_abbrevs`](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/view-pg-timezone-abbrevs.html) and [`pg_timezone_names`](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/view-pg-timezone-names.html) views.
  This is useful to support custom timezone abbreviation logic while timezone
  support doesn't land in Materialize.

* Improve the output format of [`EXPLAIN...PLAN AS TEXT`](/sql/explain-plan/) when the `humanized_exprs`
  [output modifier](/sql/explain-plan/#output-modifiers) to avoid ambiguities when
  multiple columns have the same name.
