---
title: "Materialize v0.79"
date: 2023-12-13
released: true
patch: 1
---

## v0.79.0

#### Sources and sinks

* For [PostgreSQL sources](https://materialize.com/docs/sql/create-source/postgres/),
  prevent the creation of new sources when the upstream database does not have a
  sufficient number of replication slots available.

* Fix a bug where subsources where created in the active schema, rather than the
  schema of the source, when using the `FOR SCHEMAS` option in
  [PostgreSQL sources](https://materialize.com/docs/sql/create-source/postgres/).

* Add [`mz_aws_privatelink_connection_status_history`](/sql/system-catalog/mz_internal/#mz_aws_privatelink_connection_status_history)
  to the system catalog. This table contains a row describing the historical
  status for each [AWS PrivateLink connection](/sql/create-connection/#aws-privatelink)
  in the system.

#### SQL

* Add [`mz_compute_hydration_status`](/sql/system-catalog/mz_internal/#mz_compute_hydration_statuses)
  to the system catalog. This table describes the per-replica hydration status of
  indexes, materialized views, or subscriptions, which is useful to track when
  objects are "caught up" in the context of [blue/green deployments](/manage/blue-green).

* Add `create_sql` to object-specific tables in `mz_catalog`(_e.g._ `mz_sources`).
  This column provides the DDL used to create the object.

* Allow calling functions from the `mz_internal` schema, which are considered
  safe but unstable (_e.g._ `is_rbac_enabled`).

#### Bug fixes and other improvements

* Improve type coercion in `WITH MUTUALLY RECURSIVE` common table expressions. For
  example, you can now return `NUMERIC` values of arbitrary scales (_e.g._ `NUMERIC
  (38,2)` for columns defined as `NUMERIC`.

* Automatically enable compaction when creating the progress topic for a Kafka
  sink. **Warning:** Versions of Redpanda before v22.3 do not support using
  compaction for Materialize's progress topics. You need to manually create the
  connection's progress topic with compaction disabled to use sinks with these
  versions of Redpanda.
