# doc/user

This is the root directory of the Materialize user docs, which are rendered by
[Hugo] locally and published by CI to <https://materialize.io/docs>.

## Viewing the docs locally

1. [Install Hugo](https://gohugo.io/getting-started/installing/).

1. Launch the site by running:

    ```shell
    cd doc/user
    hugo serve -D
    ```

    If you're making changes to the site, you might want a more cache-busting
    version:

    ```shell
    hugo server --disableFastRender --ignoreCache
    ```

1. Open <http://localhost:1313>.

You can also read the documentation in Markdown in the `content` directory,
though some features like our SQL syntax diagrams will not be readily
accessible.

## Structure

- `archetypes`: Metadata templates for new docs.
- `assets`: Content used dynamically, i.e. JavaScript and SCSS.
- `content`: All of the docs content, though this is mostly content symlinked to
  `/doc/user`.
- `data`: Any JSON or YAML files you would want to use as a datastore.
- `layouts`: All of the HTML templates for the site.
    - `partials`: Many HTML components, as well as our SQL diagrams.
- `resources`: The results of dynamically generating content from `assets`.
- `static`: Static files for the site, such as images and fonts.

## Tasks

### Updating CSS

No CSS is shared with the marketing website to keep the docs CSS maintainable.
If the marketing website changes, we will need to update the docs CSS to
visually match.

### General stylesheet updates

You can see how commonly rendered elements look by going to
[`localhost:1313/stylesheet`](http://localhost:1313/stylesheet).

You can use this as a scratch area by editing `content/stylesheet.md`.

### Railroad diagrams for SQL grammar

Railroad diagrams consist of two parts:

- `bnf` files that describe the grammar you want to convey in a railroad
  diagram.
- `svg` files that contain an `svg` generated by
  <https://www.bottlecaps.de/rr/ui>

#### To generate diagrams

1. Modify the grammar in `sql-grammar/sql-grammar.bnf`, adding new nonterminals
   as necessary.
1. Ensure the diagram looks like you want using
   <https://www.bottlecaps.de/rr/ui>.
2. Run `sql-grammar/generate.sh`.

You can now include the diagram on a page using:

```html
{{< diagram "SOME-NONTERMINAL.svg" >}}
```

- `SOME-NONTERMINAL` must be the name of a nonterminal in the BNF.

## Function + Operator docs

The **Functions** you see at `www/docs/sql/functions/` are populated from
`www/data/sql_funcs.yml`. Unfortunately this means that they're ad hoc and are
not actually generated from the Materialize source code.

As new functions get added, this file must be manually updated. The idea here is
to structure functions by their input type (whereas operators are grouped by
their output type), largely influenced by the way that Postgres structures their
function docs.

If you see the need to add or change the grouping here, don't be shy.

## `CREATE SOURCE` docs

Materialize's sources consist of the following components:

- Connectors to some external source of data (e.g. Kafka)
- Formats of that data (e.g. Avro, text)
- Envelopes, which express how Materialize treats data w/r/t CRUD operations
  (e.g. append-only, supporting updated and deletes)

Because each of these three components have multiple implementations, the
docs for `CREATE SOURCE` are too large to fit on a single page. To manage this,
we've broken the `CREATE SOURCE` documentation into many pages (one page for
each meaningfully distinct combination of connector and format), and leveraged
Hugo partials and shortcodes to simplify page creation and resuse content across
pages.

You can find all of the `CREATE SOURCE` docs at `/doc/user/sql/create-source/`.

### Hugo shortcodes and partials

Hugo partials are template components, and shortcodes are designed to provide
a dynamic interface for using those components.

In the case of Materialize, we rely on shortcodes in
`/www/layouts/shortcodes/create-source` to simplify generating our many
`CREATE SOURCE` pages, namely `syntax-details`.  This provides an interface
to dynamically display content from `www/layouts/partials/create-source`.

`...partials/create-source` is structured like:

```
<component>
  - <implementation>
    - details.html (fills in Details heading)
    - syntax.html (fills in Syntax table)
    - with-options.html (only for connectors; adds With Options heading)
```

The `syntax-details` shortcode then provides an interface to express which
implementations of each components you want to include in the documentation
by simply including the `<implementation>` folder name in the argument for
the `<component>`. This should be fairly intuitive, but there are the following
caveats:

- `connector` only takes one value. The `<implementation>/with-options.html`
  content displays beneath the **Syntax** header.
- `formats` and `envelopes` can take multiple arguments separated by spaces (e.g.
  `"text bytes"`).

Here's an example:

```
{{% create-source/syntax-details connector="kafka" formats="avro-ccsr" envelopes="debezium upsert append-only" %}}
```

### Remaining to-dos

This is currently a v0 of an attempt to simplify managing the `CREATE SOURCE`
docs. Future wants include:

- Modularizing railroad diagrams (i.e. genericize root diagram, and bring in
  specific implementation diagrams when invoked).
- Dynamic front-end that lets users "choose their own adventure" to get the
  correct content in front of them.
- Dynamic sample generator.

### Updating `CREATE SOURCE` pages

- To update the details of any specific implementation, updating
  the partial template content immediately propagates those changes to all
  of the content that relies on it.

  If you want to express conditional logic in these, the easiest way is passing
  in some parameter from the `syntax-details` shortcode, and then checking for
  it in the template.

- To add implementations, simply add the directory to the appropriate component's
  folder, along with the same files as the other implementations. You'll then
  need to reference the implementation when invoking the `syntax-details`
  shortcode.

## Syntax highlighting

We use Hugo's built-in support for syntax highlighting through Chroma. In
`config.toml`:

```toml
pygmentsCodeFences = true
```

This will probably need to be changed at some point in the future to allow for
highlighting Materialized extensions to the SQL standard, as well as generally
beautifying the syntax highlighting color scheme––but for right now, what's
there suffices.

You can adjust the highlight colors as necessary in `assets/_highlight.scss`.

Most code samples contain two components: the SQL query you want to run and the
expected output.

Due to some design choice in the syntax highlighter used by Hugo, you must
select a language to highlight the code blocks in or none of the expected
formatting gets applied.

For SQL blocks, the natural choice is `sql`. For the response blocks, which
don't need to be/shouldn't be syntax highlighted, you can use _any_
non-recognized string as the language (i.e. anything that isn't popular
programming language). For expressivity, we chose `nofmt`.

## Known limitations

- Cannot display formatted text in descriptions or menus (e.g. cannot format
  page titles in code blocks).
- Does not support more than 2 levels in menus.
- Is not "responsive" and makes naive decisions about breakpoints. If someone
  would like to volunteer their web development expertise to make this more
  sane, I would be really happy to help them out.

## Miscellany, Trivia, & Footguns

- Headers are automatically hyperlinked using [AnchorJS].
- Railroad diagrams are managed in `layouts/partials/sql-grammar`.

[AnchorJS]: https://www.bryanbraun.com/anchorjs/
[Hugo]: https://gohugo.io/
