doc/user/content/sql/system-catalog/mz_catalog.md, before:

---
title: "mz_catalog"
description: "mz_catalog is a system catalog that exposes metadata in Materialize's native format."
menu:
  main:
    parent: 'system-catalog'
    weight: 1
---

The following sections describe the available relations in the `mz_catalog` schema.
These relations which contain metadata about objects within the Materialize instance.
This incudes descriptions of each database, schema, source, table, view, sink, and
index in the system.

### `mz_array_types`

The `mz_array_types` table contains a row for each array type in the system.

Field          | Type       | Meaning
---------------|------------|--------
`type_id`      | [`text`]   | The ID of the array type.
`element_id`   | [`text`]   | The ID of the array's element type.

### `mz_audit_events`

The `mz_audit_events` table records create, alter, and drop events for the
other objects in the system catalog.

Field           | Type                         | Meaning
----------------|------------------------------|--------
`id  `          | [`bigint`]                   | The ordered id of the event.
`event_type`    | [`text`]                     | The type of the event: `create`, `drop`, `alter`, or `rename`.
`object_type`   | [`text`]                     | The type of the affected object: `cluster`, `cluster-replica`, `index`, `materialized-view`, `sink`, `source`, or `view`.
`event_details` | [`jsonb`]                    | Additional details about the event. The shape of the details varies based on `event_type` and `object_type`.
`user`          | [`text`]                     | The user who triggered the event, or `NULL` if triggered by the system.
`occurred_at`   | [`timestamp with time zone`] | The time at which the event occurred.

### `mz_base_types`

The `mz_base_types` table contains a row for each base type in the system.

Field          | Type       | Meaning
---------------|------------|----------
`type_id`      | [`text`]   | The ID of the type.

### `mz_columns`

The `mz_columns` contains a row for each column in each table, source, and view
in the system.

Field            | Type        | Meaning
-----------------|-------------|--------
`id`             | [`bigint`]  | The unique ID of the table, source, or view containing the column.
`name`           | [`text`]    | The name of the column.
`position`       | [`bigint`]  | The 1-indexed position of the column in its containing table, source, or view.
`nullable`       | [`boolean`] | Can the column contain a `NULL` value?
`type`           | [`text`]    | The data type of the column.
`default`        | [`text`]    | The default expression of the column.
`type_oid`       | [`oid`]     | The OID of the type of the column (references `mz_types`).

### `mz_databases`

The `mz_databases` table contains a row for each database in the system.

Field  | Type       | Meaning
-------|------------|--------
`id`   | [`bigint`] | Materialize's unique ID for the database.
`oid`  | [`oid`]    | A [PostgreSQL-compatible OID][oid] for the database.
`name` | [`text`]   | The name of the database.

### `mz_functions`

The `mz_functions` table contains a row for each function in the system.

Field         | Type           | Meaning
--------------|----------------|--------
`id`          | [`text`]       | Materialize's unique ID for the function.
`oid`         | [`oid`]        | A [PostgreSQL-compatible OID][oid] for the function.
`schema_id`   | [`bigint`]     | The ID of the schema to which the function belongs.
`name`        | [`text`]       | The name of the function.
`arg_ids`     | [`text array`] | The function's arguments' types. Elements refers to `mz_types.id`.
`variadic_id` | [`text`]       | The variadic array parameter's elements, or `NULL` if the function does not have a variadic parameter. Refers to `mz_types.id`.
`ret_id`      | [`text`]       | The returned value's type, or `NULL` if the function does not return a value. Refers to `mz_types.id`. Note that for table functions with > 1 column, this type corresponds to [`record`].
`ret_set`     | [`boolean`]       | Whether the returned value is a set, i.e. the function is a table function.

### `mz_indexes`

The `mz_indexes` table contains a row for each index in the system.

Field        | Type        | Meaning
-------------|-------------|--------
`id`         | [`text`]    | Materialize's unique ID for the index.
`oid`        | [`oid`]     | A [PostgreSQL-compatible OID][oid] for the index.
`name`       | [`text`]    | The name of the index.
`on_id`      | [`text`]    | The ID of the relation on which the index is built.

### `mz_index_columns`

The `mz_index_columns` table contains a row for each column in each index in the
system. For example, an index on `(a, b + 1)` would have two rows in this table,
one for each of the two columns in the index.

For a given row, if `field_number` is null then `expression` will be nonnull, or
vice-versa.

Field            | Type        | Meaning
-----------------|-------------|--------
`index_id`       | [`text`]    | The ID of the index which contains this column.
`index_position` | [`bigint`]  | The 1-indexed position of this column within the index. (The order of columns in an index does not necessarily match the order of columns in the relation on which the index is built.)
`on_position`    | [`bigint`]  | If not `NULL`, specifies the 1-indexed position of a column in the relation on which this index is built that determines the value of this index column.
`on_expression`  | [`text`]    | If not `NULL`, specifies a SQL expression that is evaluated to compute the value of this index column. The expression may contain references to any of the columns of the relation.
`nullable`       | [`boolean`] | Can this column of the index evaluate to `NULL`?

### `mz_kafka_connections`

The `mz_kafka_connections` table contains a row for each Kafka connection in the
system.

Field                 | Type           | Meaning
----------------------|----------------|--------
`id`                  | [`text`]       | The ID of the connection.
`brokers`             | [`text array`] | The addresses of the Kafka brokers to connect to.
`sink_progress_topic` | [`text`]       | The name of the Kafka topic where any sinks associated with this connection will track their progress information and other metadata. The contents of this topic are unspecified.

### `mz_kafka_sinks`

The `mz_kafka_sinks` table contains a row for each Kafka sink in the system.

Field                | Type     | Meaning
---------------------|----------|--------
`id`                 | [`text`] | The ID of the sink.
`topic`              | [`text`] | The name of the Kafka topic into which the sink is writing.

### `mz_list_types`

The `mz_list_types` table contains a row for each list type in the system.

Field        | Type     | Meaning
-------------|----------|--------
`type_id`    | [`text`] | The ID of the list type.
`element_id` | [`text`] | The IID of the list's element type.

### `mz_materialized_views`

The `mz_materialized_views` table contains a row for each materialized view in the system.

Field          | Type        | Meaning
---------------|-------------|----------
`id`           | [`text`]    | Materialize's unique ID for the materialized view.
`oid`          | [`oid`]     | A [PostgreSQL-compatible OID][oid] for the materialized view.
`schema_id`    | [`bigint`]  | The ID of the schema to which the materialized view belongs.
`name`         | [`text`]    | The name of the materialized view.
`cluster_id`   | [`bigint`]  | The ID of the cluster maintaining the materialized view.
`definition`   | [`text`]    | The materialized view definition (a `SELECT` query).

### `mz_map_types`

The `mz_map_types` table contains a row for each map type in the system.

Field          | Type       | Meaning
---------------|------------|----------
`type_id`      | [`text`]   | The ID of the map type.
`key_id `      | [`text`]   | The ID of the map's key type.
`value_id`     | [`text`]   | The ID of the map's value type.

### `mz_objects`

The `mz_objects` view contains a row for each table, source, view, materialized view, sink,
index, connection, secret, type, and function in the system.

IDs for all objects represented in `mz_objects` share a namespace. If there is a view
with ID u1, there will never be a table, source, view, materialized view, sink, index,
connection, secret, type, or function with ID u1.

Field       | Type       | Meaning
------------|------------|--------
`id`        | [`text`]   | Materialize's unique ID for the object.
`oid`       | [`oid`]    | A [PostgreSQL-compatible OID][oid] for the object.
`schema_id` | [`bigint`] | The ID of the schema to which the object belongs.
`name`      | [`text`]   | The name of the object.
`type`      | [`text`]   | The type of the object: one of `table`, `source`, `view`, `materialized view`, `sink`, `index`, `connection`, `secret`, `type`, or `function`.

### `mz_pseudo_types`

The `mz_pseudo_types` table contains a row for each pseudo type in the system.

Field          | Type       | Meaning
---------------|------------|----------
`type_id`      | [`text`]   | The ID of the type.

### `mz_relations`

The `mz_relations` view contains a row for each table, source, view, and
materialized view in the system.

Field       | Type       | Meaning
------------|------------|--------
`id`        | [`text`]   | Materialize's unique ID for the relation.
`oid`       | [`oid`]    | A [PostgreSQL-compatible OID][oid] for the relation.
`schema_id` | [`bigint`] | The ID of the schema to which the relation belongs.
`name`      | [`text`]   | The name of the relation.
`type`      | [`text`]   | The type of the relation: either `table`, `source`, `view`, or `materialized view`.

### `mz_roles`

The `mz_roles` table contains a row for each role in the system.

Field  | Type       | Meaning
-------|------------|--------
`id`   | [`bigint`] | Materialize's unique ID for the role.
`oid`  | [`oid`]    | A [PostgreSQL-compatible OID][oid] for the role.
`name` | [`text`]   | The name of the role.

### `mz_schemas`

The `mz_schemas` table contains a row for each schema in the system.

Field         | Type       | Meaning
--------------|------------|--------
`id`          | [`bigint`] | Materialize's unique ID for the schema.
`oid`         | [`oid`]    | A [PostgreSQL-compatible oid][oid] for the schema.
`database_id` | [`bigint`] | The ID of the database containing the schema.
`name`        | [`text`]   | The name of the schema.

### `mz_sinks`

The `mz_sinks` table contains a row for each sink in the system.

Field            | Type        | Meaning
-----------------|-------------|--------
`id`             | [`text`]    | Materialize's unique ID for the sink.
`oid`            | [`oid`]     | A [PostgreSQL-compatible OID][oid] for the sink.
`schema_id`      | [`bigint`]  | The ID of the schema to which the sink belongs.
`name`           | [`text`]    | The name of the sink.
`type`           | [`text`]    | The type of the sink: `kafka`.
`connection_id`  | [`text`]    | The ID of the connection associated with the sink, if any.
`size`           | [`text`]    | The size of the sink.

### `mz_sources`

The `mz_sources` table contains a row for each source in the system.

Field            | Type       | Meaning
-----------------|------------|----------
`id`             | [`text`]   | Materialize's unique ID for the source.
`oid`            | [`oid`]    | A [PostgreSQL-compatible OID][oid] for the source.
`schema_id`      | [`bigint`] | The ID of the schema to which the source belongs.
`name`           | [`text`]   | The name of the source.
`type`           | [`text`]   | The type of the source: `kafka`, `postgres`, or `load-generator`.
`connection_id`  | [`text`]   | The ID of the connection associated with the source, if any.
`size`           | [`text`]   | The [size](/sql/create-source/#sizing-a-source) of the source.

### `mz_storage_usage`

The `mz_storage_usage` table describes the storage utilization of each
table, source, and materialized view in the system. Storage utilization is
assessed approximately every hour.

Field                  | Type                         | Meaning
---------------------- | ---------------------------- | -----------------------------------------------------------
`object_id`            | [`text`]                     | The ID of the table, source, or materialized view.
`size_bytes`           | [`bigint`]                   | The number of storage bytes used by the object.
`collection_timestamp` | [`timestamp with time zone`] | The time at which storage usage of the object was assessed.

### `mz_tables`

The `mz_tables` table contains a row for each table in the system.

Field            | Type       | Meaning
-----------------|------------|----------
`id`             | [`text`]   | Materialize's unique ID for the table.
`oid`            | [`oid`]    | A [PostgreSQL-compatible OID][oid] for the table.
`schema_id`      | [`bigint`] | The ID of the schema to which the table belongs.
`name`           | [`text`]   | The name of the table.
`persisted_name` | [`text`]   | The name of the table's persisted materialization, or `NULL` if the table is not being persisted.

### `mz_types`

The `mz_types` table contains a row for each type in the system.

Field          | Type       | Meaning
---------------|------------|----------
`id`           | [`text`]   | Materialize's unique ID for the type.
`oid`          | [`oid`]    | A [PostgreSQL-compatible OID][oid] for the type.
`schema_id`    | [`bigint`] | The ID of the schema to which the type belongs.
`name`         | [`text`]   | The name of the type.

### `mz_views`

The `mz_views` table contains a row for each view in the system.

Field          | Type        | Meaning
---------------|-------------|----------
`id`           | [`text`]    | Materialize's unique ID for the view.
`oid`          | [`oid`]     | A [PostgreSQL-compatible OID][oid] for the view.
`schema_id`    | [`bigint`]  | The ID of the schema to which the view belongs.
`name`         | [`text`]    | The name of the view.
`definition`   | [`text`]    | The view definition (a `SELECT` query).

[`bigint`]: /sql/types/bigint
[`boolean`]: /sql/types/boolean
[`jsonb`]: /sql/types/jsonb
[`oid`]: /sql/types/oid
[`text`]: /sql/types/text
[`timestamp with time zone`]: /sql/types/timestamp
[oid]: /sql/types/oid
[`text array`]: /sql/types/array
[`record`]: /sql/types/record

Commit message:

doc/user: document mz_cluster* system tables

doc/user/content/sql/system-catalog/mz_catalog.md, after:

---
title: "mz_catalog"
description: "mz_catalog is a system catalog that exposes metadata in Materialize's native format."
menu:
  main:
    parent: 'system-catalog'
    weight: 1
---

The following sections describe the available relations in the `mz_catalog` schema.
These relations which contain metadata about objects within the Materialize instance.
This incudes descriptions of each database, schema, source, table, view, sink, and
index in the system.

### `mz_array_types`

The `mz_array_types` table contains a row for each array type in the system.

Field          | Type       | Meaning
---------------|------------|--------
`type_id`      | [`text`]   | The ID of the array type.
`element_id`   | [`text`]   | The ID of the array's element type.

### `mz_audit_events`

The `mz_audit_events` table records create, alter, and drop events for the
other objects in the system catalog.

Field           | Type                         | Meaning
----------------|------------------------------|--------
`id  `          | [`bigint`]                   | The ordered id of the event.
`event_type`    | [`text`]                     | The type of the event: `create`, `drop`, `alter`, or `rename`.
`object_type`   | [`text`]                     | The type of the affected object: `cluster`, `cluster-replica`, `index`, `materialized-view`, `sink`, `source`, or `view`.
`event_details` | [`jsonb`]                    | Additional details about the event. The shape of the details varies based on `event_type` and `object_type`.
`user`          | [`text`]                     | The user who triggered the event, or `NULL` if triggered by the system.
`occurred_at`   | [`timestamp with time zone`] | The time at which the event occurred.

### `mz_base_types`

The `mz_base_types` table contains a row for each base type in the system.

Field          | Type       | Meaning
---------------|------------|----------
`type_id`      | [`text`]   | The ID of the type.

### `mz_columns`

The `mz_columns` contains a row for each column in each table, source, and view
in the system.

Field            | Type        | Meaning
-----------------|-------------|--------
`id`             | [`bigint`]  | The unique ID of the table, source, or view containing the column.
`name`           | [`text`]    | The name of the column.
`position`       | [`bigint`]  | The 1-indexed position of the column in its containing table, source, or view.
`nullable`       | [`boolean`] | Can the column contain a `NULL` value?
`type`           | [`text`]    | The data type of the column.
`default`        | [`text`]    | The default expression of the column.
`type_oid`       | [`oid`]     | The OID of the type of the column (references `mz_types`).

### `mz_clusters`

The `mz_clusters` table contains a row for each cluster in the system.

Field          | Type       | Meaning
---------------|------------|--------
`id`           | [`bigint`] | Materialize's unique ID for the cluster.
`name`         | [`text`]   | The name of the cluster.

### `mz_cluster_replicas`

The `mz_cluster_replicas` table contains a row for each cluster replica in the system.

Field               | Type       | Meaning
--------------------|------------|--------
`cluster_id`        | [`bigint`] | The ID of the cluster to which the replica belongs.
`id`                | [`bigint`] | Materialize's unique ID for the cluster replica.
`name`              | [`text`]   | The name of the cluster replica.
`size`              | [`text`]   | The cluster replica's size, selected during creation.
`availability_zone` | [`text`]   | The cluster replica's target availability zone, selected during creation. This value is `NULL` if no availability zone was specified when the replica was created.

### `mz_databases`

The `mz_databases` table contains a row for each database in the system.

Field  | Type       | Meaning
-------|------------|--------
`id`   | [`bigint`] | Materialize's unique ID for the database.
`oid`  | [`oid`]    | A [PostgreSQL-compatible OID][oid] for the database.
`name` | [`text`]   | The name of the database.

### `mz_functions`

The `mz_functions` table contains a row for each function in the system.

Field         | Type           | Meaning
--------------|----------------|--------
`id`          | [`text`]       | Materialize's unique ID for the function.
`oid`         | [`oid`]        | A [PostgreSQL-compatible OID][oid] for the function.
`schema_id`   | [`bigint`]     | The ID of the schema to which the function belongs.
`name`        | [`text`]       | The name of the function.
`arg_ids`     | [`text array`] | The function's arguments' types. Elements refers to `mz_types.id`.
`variadic_id` | [`text`]       | The variadic array parameter's elements, or `NULL` if the function does not have a variadic parameter. Refers to `mz_types.id`.
`ret_id`      | [`text`]       | The returned value's type, or `NULL` if the function does not return a value. Refers to `mz_types.id`. Note that for table functions with > 1 column, this type corresponds to [`record`].
`ret_set`     | [`boolean`]       | Whether the returned value is a set, i.e. the function is a table function.

### `mz_indexes`

The `mz_indexes` table contains a row for each index in the system.

Field        | Type        | Meaning
-------------|-------------|--------
`id`         | [`text`]    | Materialize's unique ID for the index.
`oid`        | [`oid`]     | A [PostgreSQL-compatible OID][oid] for the index.
`name`       | [`text`]    | The name of the index.
`on_id`      | [`text`]    | The ID of the relation on which the index is built.

### `mz_index_columns`

The `mz_index_columns` table contains a row for each column in each index in the
system. For example, an index on `(a, b + 1)` would have two rows in this table,
one for each of the two columns in the index.

For a given row, if `field_number` is null then `expression` will be nonnull, or
vice-versa.

Field            | Type        | Meaning
-----------------|-------------|--------
`index_id`       | [`text`]    | The ID of the index which contains this column.
`index_position` | [`bigint`]  | The 1-indexed position of this column within the index. (The order of columns in an index does not necessarily match the order of columns in the relation on which the index is built.)
`on_position`    | [`bigint`]  | If not `NULL`, specifies the 1-indexed position of a column in the relation on which this index is built that determines the value of this index column.
`on_expression`  | [`text`]    | If not `NULL`, specifies a SQL expression that is evaluated to compute the value of this index column. The expression may contain references to any of the columns of the relation.
`nullable`       | [`boolean`] | Can this column of the index evaluate to `NULL`?

### `mz_kafka_connections`

The `mz_kafka_connections` table contains a row for each Kafka connection in the
system.

Field                 | Type           | Meaning
----------------------|----------------|--------
`id`                  | [`text`]       | The ID of the connection.
`brokers`             | [`text array`] | The addresses of the Kafka brokers to connect to.
`sink_progress_topic` | [`text`]       | The name of the Kafka topic where any sinks associated with this connection will track their progress information and other metadata. The contents of this topic are unspecified.

### `mz_kafka_sinks`

The `mz_kafka_sinks` table contains a row for each Kafka sink in the system.

Field                | Type     | Meaning
---------------------|----------|--------
`id`                 | [`text`] | The ID of the sink.
`topic`              | [`text`] | The name of the Kafka topic into which the sink is writing.

### `mz_list_types`

The `mz_list_types` table contains a row for each list type in the system.

Field        | Type     | Meaning
-------------|----------|--------
`type_id`    | [`text`] | The ID of the list type.
`element_id` | [`text`] | The IID of the list's element type.

### `mz_materialized_views`

The `mz_materialized_views` table contains a row for each materialized view in the system.

Field          | Type        | Meaning
---------------|-------------|----------
`id`           | [`text`]    | Materialize's unique ID for the materialized view.
`oid`          | [`oid`]     | A [PostgreSQL-compatible OID][oid] for the materialized view.
`schema_id`    | [`bigint`]  | The ID of the schema to which the materialized view belongs.
`name`         | [`text`]    | The name of the materialized view.
`cluster_id`   | [`bigint`]  | The ID of the cluster maintaining the materialized view.
`definition`   | [`text`]    | The materialized view definition (a `SELECT` query).

### `mz_map_types`

The `mz_map_types` table contains a row for each map type in the system.

Field          | Type       | Meaning
---------------|------------|----------
`type_id`      | [`text`]   | The ID of the map type.
`key_id `      | [`text`]   | The ID of the map's key type.
`value_id`     | [`text`]   | The ID of the map's value type.

### `mz_objects`

The `mz_objects` view contains a row for each table, source, view, materialized view, sink,
index, connection, secret, type, and function in the system.

IDs for all objects represented in `mz_objects` share a namespace. If there is a view
with ID u1, there will never be a table, source, view, materialized view, sink, index,
connection, secret, type, or function with ID u1.

Field       | Type       | Meaning
------------|------------|--------
`id`        | [`text`]   | Materialize's unique ID for the object.
`oid`       | [`oid`]    | A [PostgreSQL-compatible OID][oid] for the object.
`schema_id` | [`bigint`] | The ID of the schema to which the object belongs.
`name`      | [`text`]   | The name of the object.
`type`      | [`text`]   | The type of the object: one of `table`, `source`, `view`, `materialized view`, `sink`, `index`, `connection`, `secret`, `type`, or `function`.

### `mz_pseudo_types`

The `mz_pseudo_types` table contains a row for each pseudo type in the system.

Field          | Type       | Meaning
---------------|------------|----------
`type_id`      | [`text`]   | The ID of the type.

### `mz_relations`

The `mz_relations` view contains a row for each table, source, view, and
materialized view in the system.

Field       | Type       | Meaning
------------|------------|--------
`id`        | [`text`]   | Materialize's unique ID for the relation.
`oid`       | [`oid`]    | A [PostgreSQL-compatible OID][oid] for the relation.
`schema_id` | [`bigint`] | The ID of the schema to which the relation belongs.
`name`      | [`text`]   | The name of the relation.
`type`      | [`text`]   | The type of the relation: either `table`, `source`, `view`, or `materialized view`.

### `mz_roles`

The `mz_roles` table contains a row for each role in the system.

Field  | Type       | Meaning
-------|------------|--------
`id`   | [`bigint`] | Materialize's unique ID for the role.
`oid`  | [`oid`]    | A [PostgreSQL-compatible OID][oid] for the role.
`name` | [`text`]   | The name of the role.

### `mz_schemas`

The `mz_schemas` table contains a row for each schema in the system.

Field         | Type       | Meaning
--------------|------------|--------
`id`          | [`bigint`] | Materialize's unique ID for the schema.
`oid`         | [`oid`]    | A [PostgreSQL-compatible oid][oid] for the schema.
`database_id` | [`bigint`] | The ID of the database containing the schema.
`name`        | [`text`]   | The name of the schema.

### `mz_sinks`

The `mz_sinks` table contains a row for each sink in the system.

Field            | Type        | Meaning
-----------------|-------------|--------
`id`             | [`text`]    | Materialize's unique ID for the sink.
`oid`            | [`oid`]     | A [PostgreSQL-compatible OID][oid] for the sink.
`schema_id`      | [`bigint`]  | The ID of the schema to which the sink belongs.
`name`           | [`text`]    | The name of the sink.
`type`           | [`text`]    | The type of the sink: `kafka`.
`connection_id`  | [`text`]    | The ID of the connection associated with the sink, if any.
`size`           | [`text`]    | The size of the sink.

### `mz_sources`

The `mz_sources` table contains a row for each source in the system.

Field            | Type       | Meaning
-----------------|------------|----------
`id`             | [`text`]   | Materialize's unique ID for the source.
`oid`            | [`oid`]    | A [PostgreSQL-compatible OID][oid] for the source.
`schema_id`      | [`bigint`] | The ID of the schema to which the source belongs.
`name`           | [`text`]   | The name of the source.
`type`           | [`text`]   | The type of the source: `kafka`, `postgres`, or `load-generator`.
`connection_id`  | [`text`]   | The ID of the connection associated with the source, if any.
`size`           | [`text`]   | The [size](/sql/create-source/#sizing-a-source) of the source.

### `mz_storage_usage`

The `mz_storage_usage` table describes the storage utilization of each
table, source, and materialized view in the system. Storage utilization is
assessed approximately every hour.

Field                  | Type                         | Meaning
---------------------- | ---------------------------- | -----------------------------------------------------------
`object_id`            | [`text`]                     | The ID of the table, source, or materialized view.
`size_bytes`           | [`bigint`]                   | The number of storage bytes used by the object.
`collection_timestamp` | [`timestamp with time zone`] | The time at which storage usage of the object was assessed.

### `mz_tables`

The `mz_tables` table contains a row for each table in the system.

Field            | Type       | Meaning
-----------------|------------|----------
`id`             | [`text`]   | Materialize's unique ID for the table.
`oid`            | [`oid`]    | A [PostgreSQL-compatible OID][oid] for the table.
`schema_id`      | [`bigint`] | The ID of the schema to which the table belongs.
`name`           | [`text`]   | The name of the table.
`persisted_name` | [`text`]   | The name of the table's persisted materialization, or `NULL` if the table is not being persisted.

### `mz_types`

The `mz_types` table contains a row for each type in the system.

Field          | Type       | Meaning
---------------|------------|----------
`id`           | [`text`]   | Materialize's unique ID for the type.
`oid`          | [`oid`]    | A [PostgreSQL-compatible OID][oid] for the type.
`schema_id`    | [`bigint`] | The ID of the schema to which the type belongs.
`name`         | [`text`]   | The name of the type.

### `mz_views`

The `mz_views` table contains a row for each view in the system.

Field          | Type        | Meaning
---------------|-------------|----------
`id`           | [`text`]    | Materialize's unique ID for the view.
`oid`          | [`oid`]     | A [PostgreSQL-compatible OID][oid] for the view.
`schema_id`    | [`bigint`]  | The ID of the schema to which the view belongs.
`name`         | [`text`]    | The name of the view.
`definition`   | [`text`]    | The view definition (a `SELECT` query).

[`bigint`]: /sql/types/bigint
[`boolean`]: /sql/types/boolean
[`jsonb`]: /sql/types/jsonb
[`oid`]: /sql/types/oid
[`text`]: /sql/types/text
[`timestamp with time zone`]: /sql/types/timestamp
[oid]: /sql/types/oid
[`text array`]: /sql/types/array
[`record`]: /sql/types/record
